
-- Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) --

SNMP is used to monitor and manage devices on a network. 

It involves three main components:
1. SNMP Manager (Network Management System) - typically run on a PC and collects data from network devices.
2. SNMP Agent - installed on network devices (routers, switches) and sends data to the SNMP manager.
3. Management Information Base (MIB) - a collection of information that the SNMP manager can query or set on the agent.

SNMP Versions:
1. SNMPv1: The earliest version, considered outdated.
2. SNMPv2c: Updated version with better performance, but still limited security using community strings.
3. SNMPv3: Provides enhanced security features, including message integrity, authentication, and encryption.

SNMPv1 and SNMPv2c:
Community Strings: Both versions rely on clear-text passwords (community strings) for authentication.
- Read-Only (RO): Limits access to retrieving information without making changes.
- Read-Write (RW): Allows changes to be made to the device’s configuration, which is riskier.
Vulnerability: Since these passwords are transmitted in plain text, they are vulnerable to interception and attacks (like packet sniffing).

SNMPv3 Enhancements:
Security: SNMPv3 addresses security concerns by introducing new features:
- Message Integrity: Ensures the packet wasn’t altered during transit.
- Authentication: Uses hashed passwords (HMAC-MD5 or HMAC-SHA) to verify the source of the message.
- Privacy (Encryption): Encrypts the message contents, using 56-bit DES encryption, making it difficult for unauthorized parties to intercept and read.

SNMP Messages:
1. GET: Manager requests data from the agent.
2. GET-NEXT: Retrieves the next value in the MIB.
3. SET: Manager modifies the value in the agent.
4. TRAP: Agent informs the manager about an event.
5. INFORM: A reliable alternative to TRAP, available in SNMPv2c.
6. GETBULK: Used in SNMPv2c for retrieving large data sets efficiently.


-- SNMPv2c Configuration Example --

Router(config)# snmp-server community mycommunity RO
Router(config)# snmp-server host 10.10.10.1 traps version 2c mycommunity
Router(config)# snmp-server enable traps


-- SNMPv3 Configuration Example --

Router(config)# snmp-server group mygroup v3 priv
Router(config)# snmp-server user myuser mygroup v3 auth sha myauthpass priv aes 128 myprivpass
Router(config)# snmp-server host 10.10.10.1 version 3 priv myuser
Router(config)# snmp-server enable traps


SNMP helps administrators monitor, troubleshoot, and manage network performance efficiently.

























